---
layout: post
title:  "log-0.0.4 - rag vs multiagent"
date:   2025-06-09 09:00:00 +0530
---

Now I know the title sounds dumb. If you have even a shred of self-respect, you wouldn't read this. The two concepts should not be confused with each other. They have no relationship - they're entirely different things. So why am I writing this?

I've been feeling out of sync for a few days and asked an AI to help me get back on my feet. It asked me any topic/topics, and it asked me to write a blog on RAG vs MultiAgent by EOD. So here I am

## RAG - Retrieval Augented Generation

It's a technique to enhance large language models by providing necessary context before generating a response. It is actually quite simple. 

A[Query] --> B[Retriever]
    B --> C[Knowledge Base]
    C --> D[Retrieved Context]
    D --> E[LLM Generator]
    A --> E
    E --> F[Response]

When a user types in a query (like in chatgpt, or any agent) the query is embedded into a vector representation via text to embedding model like text-embedding-3-small of openai. It converts the text into a vector of 1536 dimensions. It looks something like this `[1, 1, 1, ..., ...]` 

Now we search our vector database which already has our data like blogs, FAQs, and website documentation stored as these vectors, and search using this query vector to find the nearest matching vectors. We pass the returned documents in the message to the LLM. This way llm can access the context and give a better answer. 


## MultiAgent

It's exactly how it sounds, a swarm of agents acting together to complete a task. I think it's better to explain with an example. Suppose you want to build a deep research agent and provide your users a chat interface. 

You obviously can have a single call to the LLM but that is not efficient, instead you build a swarm of agents with separate responsibilities. 
Agent 1 - formulate plan and iterate on results
Agent 2 - web search and sanitation of data retrieved
Agent 3 - hit some external api like reddit or something.

Now all these agents can ask other agents to help them out and respond effectively.

There are multiple ways of how to implement agent to agent communication, the most common way is to attach a tool `delegate(agent, message)` to agent so that agent can delegate tasks to the appropriate specialized agent.

So there you go, RAG is a agent level property and multiagent is a group agent that collaborate to effectively carry out a task in greater depth. 

Thanks 💀